It turns out we
can say a bit more
about the timing of
output transitions
for CMOS logic gates.
Let’s start by considering
the behavior of a non-CMOS
combinational device that
implements the NOR function.
Looking at the
waveform diagram, we
see that initially the A
and B inputs are both 0,
and the output Z is 1, just as
specified by the truth table.
Now B makes a 0-to-1
transition and the Z output
will eventually
reflect that change
by making a 1-to-0 transition.
As we learned in
the previous video,
the timing of the
Z transition is
determined by the
contamination and propagation
delays of the NOR gate.
Note that we can’t say anything
about the value of the Z output
in the interval of t_CD to t_PD
after the input transition,
which we indicate with a red
shaded region on the waveform
diagram.
Now, let’s consider
a different set up,
where initially both A and
B are 1, and, appropriately,
the output Z is 0.
Examining the truth table
we see that if A is 1,
the output Z will be 0
regardless of the value of B.
So what happens when B
makes a 1-to-0 transition?
Before the transition,
Z was 0 and we
expect it to be 0 again,
t_PD after the B transition.
But, in general, we can’t assume
anything about the value of Z
in the interval
between t_CD and t_PD.
Z could have any
behavior it wants in
that interval and the
device would still
be a legitimate
combinational device.
Many gate technologies,
e.g., CMOS, adhere
to even tighter restrictions.
Let’s look in detail at the
switch configuration in a CMOS
implementation of a NOR gate
when both inputs are a digital
1.
A high gate voltage will turn
on NFET switches (as indicated
by the red arrows) and turn
off PFET switches (as indicated
by the red “Xs”).
Since the pullup circuit
is not conducting
and the pulldown
circuit is conducting,
the output Z is connected
to GROUND, the voltage
for a digital 0 output.
Now, what happens when the B
input transitions from 1 to 0?
The switches controlled by B
change their configuration:
the PFET switch is now on and
the NFET switch is now off.
But overall the pullup circuit
is still not conducting
and there is still a pulldown
path from Z to GROUND.
So while there used to be
two paths from Z to GROUND
and there is now only one path,
Z has been connected to GROUND
the whole time and its value
has remained valid and stable
throughout B’s transition.
In the case of a CMOS NOR gate,
when one input is a digital 1,
the output will be unaffected by
transitions on the other input.
A lenient
combinational device is
one that exhibits
this behavior, namely
that the output is
guaranteed to be be valid
when any combination of
inputs sufficient to determine
the output value has been
valid for at least t_PD.
When some of the inputs
are in a configuration that
triggers this lenient behavior,
transitions on the other inputs
will have no effect on the
validity of the output value.
Happily most CMOS
implementations of logic gates
are naturally lenient.
We can extend our truth-table
notation to indicate lenient
behavior by using “X” for the
input values on certain rows
to indicate that input value
is irrelevant when determining
the correct output value.
The truth table for
a lenient NOR gate
calls out two such situations:
when A is 1, the value of B
is irrelevant, and when B is 1,
the value of A is irrelevant.
Transitions on the irrelevant
inputs don’t trigger the t_CD
and t_PD output timing normally
associated with an input
transition.
When does lenience matter?
We’ll need lenient components
when building memory
components, a topic we’ll get
to in a couple of chapters.
You’re ready to try building
some CMOS gates of your own!
Take a look at the first lab
exercise in Assignment 2.
I think you’ll find
it fun to work on!